we had Edward Snowden here a couple days
ago and this is response time and
several of you have written to me with
with questions to ask our guests here
from the NSA
so Richard Leger is the 15th deputy
director of the National Security Agency
and he's a senior civilian officer there
acts as its chief operating officer
guiding strategies setting internal
policies and serving as the principal
adviser to the director and all being
well welcome Rick legit to Ted
[Applause]
I'm really thankful for the opportunity
to to talk folks here I look forward to
to the conversation so thanks for
arranging for that
thank you Rick we appreciate you joining
us it's is certainly quite a strong
statement that the NSA is willing to
reach out and show a more open face here
you saw I think the talk and interview
that Edward Snowden gave here a couple
days ago what did you make of it so I
think it was interesting it was we
didn't realize that that he was gonna
show up there so kudos to you guys for
for arranging and I surprised like that
I think
I think that like a lot of the things
that have come out since since mr.
Snowden started disclosing classified
information there were there were some
some kernels of truth in there but a lot
of extrapolations and half-truths in
there and I'm interested in helping to
address those I think this is a really
important conversation that we're having
in the United States and internationally
and I think it is it is important and of
import and so given that we need to have
that be a fact-based conversation and we
want to help make that happen so that
the question that a lot of people have
is here is you know what do you make of
Snowden's motivations for doing what he
did and did he have an alternative way
that he could have gone he absolutely
did
have alternatives ways that he could
have gone and I actually think that that
characterizing him as a as a
whistleblower actually hurts legitimate
whistleblowing activities so if somebody
you know works in in NSA and there
you know with 5,000 people who do
they're all they're all you know great
citizens they're just like your
husband's father's sister's brothers
neighbors and have to use friends and
relatives all who are interested in
doing the right thing for their country
and for our allies internationally and
so there are a variety of venues to
address folks have a concern first off
their supervisor and up through the the
Supervisory chain within their
organization in general in the case of
mr. Snowden he had the option of the NSA
Inspector General of the Navy Inspector
General the Pacific Command Inspector
General the Department of Defense
Inspector General in the intelligence
community Inspector General any of them
kept his concerns and classified
channels and been happy to address them
now you had said that Snowden had other
avenues for raising his concerns the
come back on that is is a couple things
one that he but he certainly believes
that as a contractor the avenues that
would have available him as an employee
weren't available to you know that
there's a track record of other
whistleblowers like Drake Andrew Drake
being treated pretty harshly by some
views and thirdly what he was taking on
was not one specific kind of flaw that
he'd discovered but programs that have
been approved by all three branches of
government I mean is in that
circumstance isn't couldn't you argue
that what he did was reasonable no I
don't I don't agree with that I think
that the
his sorry I'm getting feedback through
the through the microphone there the
actions that he took were inappropriate
because of the fact that he put people's
lives at risk basically in the long run
and I know there's been a lot of talk in
the in the public by mr. stone and some
of the journalists that say that the
things that have been disclosed have not
put national security and people at risk
and that is categorically not true
the they actually they actually do I
think there's also a an amazing
arrogance to the idea that that he knows
better than the the framers of the
Constitution and how the government
should be designed at work first
separation of powers and the fact that
the executive and the judicial are the
executive and legislative branch have to
work together and they have checks and
balances on each other and then the
judicial branch which oversees the
entire process I think that's that's
extremely arrogant on his part can you
give a specific example of how he put
people's lives at risk
yes sure so so the things that he's
disclosed the capabilities and NSA's a
capabilities based organization so so
when we have foreign intelligence
targets legitimate things of interest
like terrorists is the iconic example
but it includes things like human
traffickers drug traffickers people who
are trying to build you know advanced
weaponry nuclear weapons and build
delivery systems for those and
nation-states who might be executing
aggression against their immediate
neighbors which you may have some some
visibility and there's some of that
that's going on right now
the the capabilities are applied in very
discreet and measured and controlled
ways so the unconstrained disclosure
those capabilities means that as
adversaries see them and recognize hey I
might be vulnerable to this they move
away from that and we have seen targets
in terrorism in the nation-state area in
smugglers of various types and other
folks who have because of the
disclosures moved away from from our
ability to have insight into what
they're doing and that effect of that is
that our people who are overseas in
dangerous places whether diplomats or
military and our allies who are in
similar situations are at greater risk
because we don't see the threats that
are coming their way so that's a general
response saying that because of his
revelations access that you had to
certain types of information has been
shut down has been closed down but that
presumes I mean the concern is that the
nature of that access was not
necessarily legitimate in the first
place I mean describe to us this bull
run program where it's alleged that the
NSA specifically weakened security in
order to get the type of access that
you've spoken out so there are when when
are legitimate foreign intelligence
targets to protect I described before
use the global telecommunication system
as their patients-- methodology and they
do because it's a great system it's the
most complex system ever devised by a
fan and it is a it is a wonder and lots
of folks in the room they're responsible
for the the creation and enhancement of
that and it's just a wonderful wonderful
thing but it's also used by people who
who are working against us and our
allies and so if I'm going to pursue
them I need to have the capability to go
after them and again the the controls
are in how I apply that capability not
I have the capability itself otherwise
if we could make it so that all the bad
guys used one corner of the Internet we
could have a domain bad guy com
that would be awesome and we could just
concentrate all our efforts there that's
not how it works they're trying to to
hide from the government's ability to to
isolate and interdict their actions and
so we have to swim in that same space
but I will tell you this
so NSA has two missions one is the
signals intelligence mission that we've
unfortunately read so much about in the
in the press the other one is the
information assurance mission which is
to protect the national security systems
of the United States by that that's
things like the communications that the
president uses the communications that
control our nuclear weapons the
communications that our military uses
around the world and the communications
that we use with our allies and then
some of our allies themselves use and so
we make recommendations on standards to
use and we use those same standards and
so we are invested in making sure that
those communications are secure for
their intended purposes it sounds like
what you're saying is that when it comes
to the Internet at large any kind of
strategy is fair game if it improves
America's safety and I think I think
this is partly where there's such a
divide of opinion that there's a lot of
people in this room and around the world
you think very differently about the
internet they think of it as a momentous
invention of humanity kind of on a par
with the Gutenberg press for example
it's that it's the bringer of knowledge
to all it's the connector of all and
it's viewed in those sort of verbs
idealistic terms and from that lens what
what the NSA has done is equivalent to
the authorities back in Germany in
inserting some device into every
printing press that would reveal which
books people bought and what they read
can you understand that from that
viewpoint it's a it's a it feels
outrageous I do understand that I
actually share the view of the utility
of the Internet and I would argue it's
bigger than the Internet it is the
global telecommunications system the
Internet is a big chunk of that but
there is a lot more
I think that that people have legitimate
concerns about the about the balance
between transparency and secrecy that's
sort of been couched as a balance
between security and national I mean of
between privacy and national security I
don't think that's the right framing I
think it really is transparency and
secrecy and so that's the national and
international conversation that we're
having and we want to participate and I
want people to participate in an
informed way so there are things we can
we talk that is a little bit more there
are things that we need to be
transparent about our authorities our
processes our oversight who we are we
NSA have not done a good job of that and
I think that's part of the reason that
this is so has been so revelational and
so sensational in the media nobody knew
who we were we were that no size agency
to never say anything you know there's
there's takeoffs of our logo with of an
eagle with headphones on around it and
so that's sort of the public
characterization and so so we need to be
more transparent about those things what
we don't need to be transparent about
because it's bad for the u.s. it's bad
for all those other countries that we
work with and that we help provide
information that helps them secure
themselves and their people it's bad to
expose operations and capabilities in a
way that that allows the people that
we're all working against they you know
generally recognized bad guys to counter
those also bad to deal a kind of body
blow to the American companies that have
essentially given the world most of the
Internet services that matter it is it's
really the the companies are are in a in
a tough position as are as are we
because the companies we compel them to
provide information just like every
other nation in the world does every
nary industrialized nation in the world
has a lawful intercept program where
they are requiring companies to provide
them with information that they need for
their security
and the companies that are involved have
complied with those programs in the same
way that they have to do when they're
operating in Russia or the UK or China
or India or you know France any country
you choose to name and so the fact that
these revelations have been sort of
broadly characterized as you can't trust
company a because your privacy is is
suspect with them
is actually only accurate in the sense
that it's accurate with every other
company in the world that deals with any
of those countries in the world and so
it's being picked up by people as a
marketing advantage and it's being
marketed that way by several countries
including in some of our allied
countries where they are saying hey you
can't trust the US but you can trust our
telecom company because we're safe and
they're actually using that to counter a
very large technological edge that US
companies have in in areas like the
cloud and internet-based technologies
you're you're sitting there with the
American flag and you know the American
Constitution guarantees freedom from
unreasonable search and seizure how how
do you characterize the American
citizens right to privacy is there such
a right yeah of course there is I think
that and we devote an inordinate amount
of time and pressure inordinate
inappropriate actually I should say
amount of time and effort in order to
ensure that we that we protect that
privacy and beyond that the privacy of
citizens around the world it's not just
Americans
you know several several things come
into play here first we're almost same
network my communications I'm a I'm a
user of a particular internet email
service that is the number one email
service of choice by terrorists around
the world number one and so on they're
right beside them in email space in the
Internet and so we need to be able to
pick that apart and find the
the information that's relevant the the
in doing so we're going to necessarily
encounter Americans and innocent foreign
citizens who we're just going about
their business and so we have procedures
in place that shreds that out that says
okay when you find that not if you find
it when you find it because you're
starting to find it here's how you
protect that these are called
minimization procedures they're approved
by the Attorney General and
constitutionally based and so we protect
those and then for for in full
you know citizens of the world who were
going about their lawful business on a
day-to-day basis the president in 17
January speech laid out some additional
protections that we are providing to
them so so I think absolutely folks do
have a right to privacy and that we work
very hard to to make sure that that
prior right to privacy is protected
what about foreigners using American
companies Internet services do they have
any privacy rights they do they do and
it's in the sense of the only way they
that we are able to to compel one of
those companies to provide us
information is when it falls into one of
three categories we can identify that
this particular person identified by a
selector of some kind is associated with
counter terrorist or proliferation or
other foreign intelligence target much
has been made of the fact that a lot of
the information you've obtained through
these programs there's essentially
metadata it's it's not necessarily the
actual words that someone has written in
an email or given on a phone call it's
it's it's who they wrote to and when and
and so forth but it's it's been argued
and someone here in the audience has
talked to a former NSA analyst who said
metadata is actually much more invasive
than the core data because in the core
data you present yourself as you want to
be presented with metadata who knows
what the conclusions are that drawn is
there anything to that I don't really
understand that argument I think that
that metadata is important for a couple
of reasons metadata
is the is the information that lets you
find connections that people are trying
to hide so when a terrorist is
corresponding with somebody else who's
not known to us but is engaged in doing
or supporting terrorist activity or
someone who's violating international
sanctions by providing nuclear weapons
related material to a country like Iran
or North Korea is trying to hide that
activity because it's illicit activity
what metadata lets you do is connect
that the alternative to that is one
that's much less efficient and much more
invasive of privacy which is gigantic
amounts of contact content collection so
metadata in that sense actually is
privacy enhancing and we don't contrary
to some of the stuff that that's been
printed we don't sit there and grind out
metadata profiles of average people if
if you're not connected to one of those
valid intelligence targets you're not of
interest to us so in terms of the
threats that face America overall where
would you place terrorism terrorism is
still number one I think that you know
we've never been in a in a time where
there are more places where where things
are going badly informing the petri dish
in which terrorists take advantage of
you know the lack of governance my an
old boss of mine Tom Fargo Admiral Fargo
used to describe it as arcs of
instability and so so you have a lot of
those arcs of instability in in the
world right now places like Syria where
there's a civil war going on and you
have massive numbers thousands and
thousands of foreign fighters who are
coming into Syria to learn how to be
terrorists and practice that activity
and lots of those people are Westerners
who are who hold passports - you know
European countries or in some cases the
United States and so they are basically
learning how to do jihad and
have expressed intent to go out and do
that later on in their in their home
countries you've got places like Iraq
which is suffering from a high level of
sectarian violence again a breeding
ground for for terrorism and you have
the activity in the Horn of Africa and
in the Sahel area of Africa again lots
of weak governance which forms a
breeding ground for terrorist activity
so I think it's very serious thing it's
number one I think number two is cyber
threat
I think cyber is a threat in in three
ways one way and probably the most the
most common way that people have have
heard about it is through the theft of
intellectual property so basically
foreign countries going in stealing
companies secrets and then providing
that information to state-owned
enterprises or companies connected to to
the government to help them leapfrog
technology or to gain business
intelligence that's then used to win
contracts overseas that is a hugely
costly set of activities that's going on
right now several nation states are
doing it second is the denial of service
attacks you're probably aware that there
have been a spate of those directed
against against the US financial sector
since since 2012 again that's a nation
state who's executing those attacks and
they're doing that as a as a semi
anonymous way of reprisal and last one
is destructive attacks and those are the
ones that concern me the most those are
on the rise you had the attack against
Saudi Aramco in in 2012 August of 2012
took down about 35,000 of their
computers with a wiper style virus you
had a follow on a week later to a Qatari
company you had March of 2013 you had
a South Korean attack that we were
tributed in the press to North Korea
that took out thousands of computers
those are on the rise and we see people
expressing interest in those
capabilities and a desire to employ them
okay so a couple things here this
because this is really the core of this
almost I mean first of all a lot of
people who look at risk and look at the
numbers don't understand this disbelief
that terrorism is still the number one
threat you know apart from September 11
I think the numbers up in the last 30 or
40 years about 500 Americans have died
from terrorism mostly from homegrown
terrorists the chance in the last few
years of being killed by terrorism is
far is less than far less than the
chance of being killed by lightning and
I guess you would say that a single
nuclear incident or bioterrorism Act or
something like that would would change
those numbers would that be the point of
view I'd say two things one is the
reason that there hasn't been in a major
attack in the United States is final
that is not an accident that's that's a
lot of hard work that we have done that
other folks in the intelligence
community have done that the military
has done and that our allies around the
globe have done you've heard the numbers
about than the tip of the iceberg in
terms of numbers of terrorist attacks at
NSA programs contributed to stopping was
50 for 25 of those in Europe and of
those 25 18 of them occurred in three
countries some of which are our allies
and some which are beating the heck out
of us over over the NSA programs by the
way so that's not an accident that those
things happen that's hard work that's us
finding intelligence on terrorist
activities and interdicting them in one
way or another through law enforcement
through cooperative activities with with
other countries and sometimes through
through military action the the other
thing I would say is that your idea of
nuclear or Kimba a threat is not at all
in fact there are number of groups who
have for several years expressed
interest in desire in obtaining those
capabilities and work towards that it's
also been said that of those 54 alleged
incidents that as few as 0 of them or
actually anything to do with these
controversial programs that mr. Snowden
revealed that it was basically through
other forms of intelligence that you're
you know you're looking for a needle in
the haystack and the effect of these
these programs these controversial
programs is just to add hay to the stack
not to really find the needle the needle
was found by other methods isn't that
isn't that isn't there something to that
no that's actually there there are two
programs that are typically implicated
in in that discussion one is the section
215 program the u.s. telephony metadata
program and the other one is the it's
popularly called the prism program it's
actually section 702 of FISA Amendment
Act but the 215 program is only relevant
to threats that are directed against the
United States and there have been a
dozen threats where that was implicated
now what you'll what you'll see people
say publicly is there's no but for case
and so there's no there's no case where
but for that the threat would have
happened but but that actually indicates
a lack of understanding of how
investigations terrorist investigations
actually work if you think about on
television you watch a murder mystery
what do you start with you start with a
body and then they work their way from
there to solve the crime we're actually
starting well before that hopefully
before there are any bodies and we're
trying to build the case for who the
people are what they're trying to do and
that involves massive amounts of
information think of it as a mosaic and
it's hard to say that any one piece of a
mosaic was necessary to building the
mosaic but to build the complete picture
you need to have all the pieces of
information on the other the non-us
related threats are those 54 the other
41 of them are 42 of them the
the prism program was hugely relevant to
that and in fact was material in in
contributing to stopping those attacks
Snowden said two days ago that terrorism
has always been in what is called in the
intelligence world a cover for action
that it's it's something that you know
because it's votes such a powerful
emotional response in people it allows
the initiation of these programs to to
achieve powers that an organization like
yours couldn't otherwise have is there
any internal debate about about that we
debate these things all the time and
there is discussion that goes on at the
any executive branch and within within
NSA itself and the intelligent about
what's right what's proportionate what's
the correct thing to do it's important
to note that the programs that we're
talking about were all authorized by two
different presidents to different
political parties by Congress twice and
by federal judges sixteen different
times and so it's not a this is not NSA
running off and do its doing its own
things this is a legitimate activity of
the United States forming government
that was agreed to by all the branches
of the United States government and
President Madison would have been proud
and yet when Congress men discovered
what was actually being done with that
authorization many of them were
completely shocked what do you think
that that is not a legitimate reaction
that it's only because it's now come out
publicly but they really knew exactly
what you were doing with the powers they
had gone I think Congress is a big body
there's 535 of them they and they change
out frequently in the case of the house
every two years and I think that the NSA
provided all the relevant information to
our oversight committees and then the
dissemination of that information by the
oversight committees throughout Congress
is something that that they managed I
think I would say that
Congress members have the opportunity to
to make themselves aware and in fact
this is a significant number of them the
ones who are assigned oversight
responsibilities did have visibility to
that and you've actually had the chairs
of those committees to say that in
public
now you mentioned the threat of cyber
attacks and I don't think anyone in this
room would disagree that that is a huge
concern but do you accept that there's a
trade-off between offensive and
defensive strategies and that it's
possible that the very measures taken to
quote weaken encryption and allow
yourself to find the bad guys might also
open the door to forms of cyber attack
so I think that two things one is you
said weaken encryption I didn't and the
other one is that that the NSA has has
both those missions and we are heavily
biased towards defense and and actually
the vulnerabilities that we find in the
overwhelming majority of cases we
disclose to the people who are
responsible for those for manufacturing
or developing those products we have a
great track record that we're actually
working on a proposal right now to be
transparent and to publish transparency
reports in the same way that the the
Internet companies are being allowed to
publish transparency reports for them we
want to be more transparent about that
so again we eat our own dog food we use
the standards we use the products that
we that we recommend and so you know
it's in our interest to to keep our
communications protected in the same way
that other people's need to be Edward
Snowden when after his talk was
wondering the horse here and in the bot
and I heard him say to a couple of
people you know they asked him about
what he thought of the NSA overall and
he's he was very complimentary about the
people who work with you he said that
it's a really impassioned a group of
employees who believe we're seeking to
do the right thing and and that they're
being that the problems have come from
just some badly conceived policies he
came over certainly very reasonably and
calmly he didn't come over like a crazy
man with it would you accept that at
least even if you disagree with how he
did it that he has opened a debate that
matters so I think that the discussion
is an important one to have I do do not
like the way that he did it I think
there were a number of other ways that
that he could have done that that would
have not endangered our people and our
the people of other nations through
losing visibility into what what our
adversaries are doing but but I do think
it's an important conversation I mean
it's been reported that there's almost a
difference of opinion with you and your
colleagues over any scenario in which he
might be offered an amnesty deal I think
your boss general Keith Alexander has
said that that would be a terrible
example for others you can't negotiate
with someone who's who's broken the law
in that way but you've been quoted as
saying that if Snowden could prove that
he was surrendering all undisclosed
documents that a deal maybe should be
considered do you still think that yeah
so so actually this is my favorite thing
about that 60 minutes interview was to
all the misfits that game for that one
actually said in response to a question
about you know would you entertain any
discussions of you know mitigating
you know action against no and I said
yeah it's worth a conversation this is
something that the Attorney General of
the United States and the president I
also actually have both talked about
this and I I defer to the Attorney
General because this is his Lane but the
you know there is a strong tradition in
in American jurisprudence of having
discussions with people who've been
charged with crimes in order if it
benefits the government to to get
something out of that that there's
always a room for the kind of discussion
so I'm not opposing any outcome but
they're there there is always room for
discussion I mean to a layperson it
seems like he has certain things to
offer the US the government you others
in in terms of putting things right and
helping figure out a smarter policy a
smarter way forward for for the future
do you see has that kind of possibility
been entertained at all so that's out of
my lane that's not an NSA thing that
would be a Department of Justice sort of
discussion I'll defer to them Rick I
when when it's not an end of his talk I
offered him the chance to share an idea
we're spreading what would be your idea
we're spreading for this group so I
think learn the facts this is a really
important conversation and it impacts
it's not just NSA it's not just the
government it's you it's it's the
Internet companies I mean the the issue
of privacy and personal data is much
bigger than just the government and so
learn the facts don't rely on headlines
don't rely on sound bytes
don't rely on one-sided conversations so
that's the idea I think worth spreading
we have a sign in our badge tab we were
badges at work with lanyards and if I
can make a plug my badge lanyard it
works as Dallas Cowboys go Dallas
and the I've just alienated half the
audience I know so the the lanyard that
are people who work in the organization
that does our analytic work have a tab
that says look at the data so that's the
idea worth spreading look at the data
Rick it took a certain amount of courage
I think actually to come and speak
openly to this group it's not something
the NSA's and a lot of in the past and
and plus the technology has been
challenging we truly appreciate you
doing that and sharing in this very
important conversation thank you so much
[Applause]